I learned I wanted to become a political scientist as a junior at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Stephen Gent and Navin Bapat quickly taught me enough about the discipline to enable me convince one graduate admissions committee that I deserved a shot at a Ph.D. \par

When I arrived at Princeton, Saurabh Pant and Ted Enamorado introduced me to mathematical analysis and were models of competence and professionalism as graduate student instructors. Every course I took at Princeton -- in Politics, Economics, or Operations Research -- sparked new ideas or equipped me with tools I needed to do my research. The set of things that I knew I did not know continually expanded throughout my time in graduate school, even as I took courses well into my fourth year of graduate school in futile hope of reducing the number of these things. \par

The Politics Department maintained a culture that encouraged intellectual curiosity and collegiality. Corwin 127 was never a particularly functional classroom or seminar room yet I will remember it fondly as the embodiment of this culture. Richard Jordan, Ryan Brutger, and Austin Wright gave practice job talks there in my first year that served as exemplars for what I hoped to achieve in a dissertation for the rest of my time in graduate school. \par

In addition to engaging courses and a supportive culture, Princeton University provided substantial material support that faciliated the completion of this dissertation. The Fellowship of Woodrow Wilson Scholars relieved me of the responsibility to teach in my fourth and fifth years. The Program in Quantitative and Analytical Political Science and the Niehaus Center provided me with office space. The Research Program in Political Economy helped me purchase data. I did not anticipate needing to purchase Australian customs records when I started graduate school. The papers embedded in this dissertation also benefited from the feedback of audiences at many conferences: the American Political Science Association's annual meeting (2019, 2020), the Midwest Political Science Association's annual meeting (2018, 2019), the Southern Political Science Association's annual meeting (2019, 2020) the International Studies Association's annual meeting (2019) and Midwest meeting (2019), the Online Peace Science Colloquium (2019), and the Formal Models of International Relations conference at Vanderbilt (2020). \par

Learning how to do research often involved chaotic spurts of searching the internet for solutions to some thankless data analysis problem. This turned out to be a remarkably effective problem solving method, thanks to the public goods provision of a small army of programmers and researchers active on Github and Stack Exchange. I could not have completed this dissertation without the enormous ecosystem of open source software developed by this army and others. I have done my best to cite the software packages I used to produce this dissertation at the end of the manuscript. These are the but the tip of an incredibly useful iceberg. \par

I pitched the skeleton of the idea that would turn into this dissertation to Kris Ramsay at the beginning of my second year. Kris, who would become my adviser, encouraged me to take a course international trade in the Economics Department despite my reservations. I was extraordinarily fortunate to receive this guidance in retrospect. I quickly learned that trade was a far richer subfield than my training in political science had led me to believe, and trade models became the engines underneath my entire dissertation project. Matias Iaryczower taught me a new way to think about empirical social science. Helen Milner retained a healthy skepticism toward my ideas, pushed me to defend my assumptions, and continually referred me to others' research that made my work better. Melissa Lee did not serve on my dissertation committee but was nevertheless a constant sorce of encouragement and welcome diversionary chats about baseball. \par

My research ended up being somewhat strange by the standards of the discipline and sometimes struggled to find an academic community to call home. Several faculty members outside of Princeton went out of their way to support me nevertheless. Rob Carroll, Brenton Kenkel, Mike Gibilisco, Brad Smith, and Scott Abramson took interest in my work and served as helpful sounding boards for my ideas. \par 

I was blessed to matriculate at Princeton with a cohort full of good people. Noam Reich, Mike Kistner, Elsa Voytas, Dan Gibbs, and Will Horne in particular made life outside of writing, coding, and coursework enjoyable. Poker games, barbequeues, and late night trips to the batting cages were always welcome distractions from work. Korhan Koçak and Naijia Liu made me happy to show up to the office every morning. \par

Despite all of this support, completing a dissertation remains a largely solitary endeavor. My friends and family outside of Princeton helped make it feel less so. The highlight of every year I spent in graduate school was a summer trip into the woods of California, Colorado, or upstate New York with Shawn, Joe, and Andy. Someday we will manage to implement all of the exceptional business ideas hatched on those trips. Central New Jersey was an ideal launch pad to visit my family, most of whom were dispersed between Boston and Washington, DC. My brothers remain my best friends. My parents, trained in science and engineering, were nothing but supportive of my decision to study a "soft" science. \par

I met Sarah for dinner on the Delaware River in New Hope, PA in on a cold February night in my second year and she quickly became the most important person in my life. I got turned around in the parking lot that night but have been headed in the right direction ever since.

